.TH L2LY 1
.SH NAME
l2ly \- convert lesson file into a minimal LilyPond grand staff

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B l2ly

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I l2ly
reads a lesson file from standard input and generates a LilyPond (.ly) document on standard output. It produces a minimal grand staff configuration featuring a melody in the treble clef and a bassline with figured bass in the bass clef.

.SH INPUT FORMAT
The program expects a lesson file containing metadata fields and brace-delimited blocks.

.SS Metadata Fields
Fields are defined as a label followed by a colon:
.TP
.B title:
The title of the lesson.
.TP
.B key:
The key signature (e.g., G).
.TP
.B time:
The time signature (e.g., 4/4).

.SS Musical Blocks
Blocks are defined as \fIname\fR = { \fIcontent\fR }.
.TP
.B bassline
Musical tokens for the bass voice.
.TP
.B figures
Continuo figures corresponding to the bassline.
.TP
.B melody
Musical tokens for the treble voice.

.SH PASSING NOTES
Bass tokens marked with a trailing `p` (e.g., \fIfis2p\fR) are treated as passing notes. The program automatically:
.IP 1. 4
Strips the `p` marker so LilyPond receives valid note names.
.IP 2. 4
Overrides any provided figure for that note with a passing-note solidus symbol (\fI<_\\>\fR).

.SH FIGURED BASS TRANSLATION
Figures are converted into LilyPond \fI\\figuremode\fR syntax. Duration information is automatically inherited from the corresponding bassline note.
.TP
.B 0
Renders as an empty figure (\fI<_>\fR).
.TP
.B # / b
A bare accidental renders as a raised or lowered third (\fI<_+>\fR or \fI<_->\fR).
.TP
.B #6 / b6
Numerical figures with accidentals render with LilyPond suffixes (\fI<6+>\fR or \fI<6->\fR).
.TP
.B 2/#4/6
Stacked figures separated by slashes are converted into space-separated groups (\fI<2 4+ 6>\fR).

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The program exits with an error message if the lesson file cannot be read from standard input.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jakob Kastelic (2026).

.SH SEE ALSO
load(1), g2ly(1), lilypond(1)
