.TH DRAW 1
.SH NAME
draw \- translate render output into Nuklear/Xlib drawing primitives

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B draw

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I draw
reads the abstract score description produced by
.IR render (1)
from standard input and writes a sequence of Nuklear/Xlib drawing
primitive commands to standard output.
Each input command is translated into one or more output primitives
that a downstream Nuklear/Xlib application can execute directly to
paint the score on screen.

All input coordinates are floating-point values in abstract musical
units (slots and staff-spaces).
All output coordinates are integer pixel values, derived by applying
fixed scale factors and margins.

.SH INPUT FORMAT
.I draw
reads the output of
.IR render (1),
one command per line.
Lines beginning with
.B #
and empty lines are ignored.
Unrecognised commands are passed through as comments.

.SS Coordinate Units
Input coordinates use two abstract units:

.TP
.B slot
Horizontal unit equal to one beat of the time-signature denominator.
A quarter note in 4/4 occupies one slot; a dotted half note occupies
1.5 slots.

.TP
.B staff-space
Vertical unit equal to the distance between two adjacent staff lines.
A five-line staff spans four staff-spaces.

.SS Input Commands

.TP
.B SCORE staves=\fIn\fR slots=\fIf\fR timesig=\fInum\fR/\fIden\fR title="\fItext\fR"
Score metadata.
.I staves
is the number of staves,
.I slots
is the total score length,
.I timesig
is the time signature, and
.I title
is the piece title.
This command produces no drawing output; it is emitted as a comment.

.TP
.B EXTENT \fItotal_x\fR \fItotal_y\fR
Total score dimensions in abstract units.
.I draw
uses this to compute the canvas size in pixels and emits a white
background rectangle followed by a
.B # canvas
comment giving the pixel dimensions.

.TP
.B LINE \fIx1\fR \fIy1\fR \fIx2\fR \fIy2\fR \fIt\fR
Straight line from (\fIx1\fR,\fIy1\fR) to (\fIx2\fR,\fIy2\fR) with
thickness \fIt\fR in staff-spaces.
Used by
.IR render (1)
for staff lines, stems, ledger lines, and barlines.

.TP
.B NOTEHEAD \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIfilled\fR \fIsp\fR
Notehead ellipse centred at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).
.I filled
is 1 for quarter and shorter notes, 0 for half notes.
.I sp
is the staff position in half-spaces; it is carried in the stream
for informational use by the renderer and is not used by
.IR draw .

.TP
.B WHOLE \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIsp\fR
Whole-note head centred at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).
Drawn as a wider oval than a half-note head.

.TP
.B STEM \fIx\fR \fIy_base\fR \fIy_tip\fR
Vertical stem at horizontal position \fIx\fR, from \fIy_base\fR
(the notehead end) to \fIy_tip\fR (the free end).

.TP
.B LEDGER \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIhalf_width\fR
Ledger line centred at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR), extending
\fIhalf_width\fR slots in each direction.

.TP
.B DOT \fIx\fR \fIy\fR
Augmentation dot centred at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).

.TP
.B TIE \fIx1\fR \fIy\fR \fIx2\fR \fIup\fR
Tie arc from \fIx1\fR to \fIx2\fR at vertical position \fIy\fR.
.I up
is 1 if the arc curves upward, 0 if it curves downward.

.TP
.B REST \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIdur\fR
Rest symbol at horizontal position \fIx\fR.
.I y
is the middle line of the staff (staff_y\~+\~2 staff-spaces).
.I dur
is 1 (whole), 2 (half), or 4 (quarter).

.TP
.B BARLINE \fIx\fR \fIy_top\fR \fIy_bot\fR
Vertical barline at horizontal position \fIx\fR, spanning from
\fIy_top\fR to \fIy_bot\fR.

.TP
.B CLEF \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIkind\fR
Clef glyph at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).
.I kind
is
.B treble
or
.BR bass .
The current clef is remembered by
.I draw
and used to position key-signature accidentals.

.TP
.B TIMESIG \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fInum\fR \fIden\fR
Time signature at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR) (top of staff).
Numerator and denominator are stacked vertically.

.TP
.B KEYSIG \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIsharps\fR
Key signature at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR) (top of staff).
.I sharps
is positive for sharps, negative for flats, zero for C major / A minor
(produces no output).
Accidentals are placed at the standard staff positions for the clef
most recently seen in the stream.

.TP
.B FIGURE \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fItext\fR
Figured-bass symbol at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).
.I text
is one of: a plain digit (2\(en7), a digit followed by
.B +
(raised) or
.B \-
(lowered),
.B /
for a passing-note solidus, or
.B _
for a blank (which
.IR render (1)
does not emit).

.TP
.B GLYPH \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIscale\fR \fIname\fR
Accidental glyph at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).
.I scale
is carried for informational use and is ignored by
.IR draw ,
which draws all accidentals at a fixed engraving size.
.I name
is
.B sharp
or
.BR flat .

.TP
.B TITLE \fIx\fR \fIy\fR "\fItext\fR"
Title string centred at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR), above the top staff.
Underscores in
.I text
are converted to spaces before output.

.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Output is written to standard output, one primitive command per line.
All coordinates are integer pixels.
Colours are given as three decimal integers \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
in the range 0\(en255.

Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments and carry no drawing instruction.

.SS Coordinate System
The origin (0,\~0) is the top-left corner of the canvas.
X increases rightward; Y increases downward.
The score origin within the canvas is offset by a fixed left margin
of 20\~px and a top margin of 60\~px.

.SS Scale Factors
Abstract units are converted to pixels by two constants:

.TP
.B PX_PER_SLOT
60 pixels per slot (horizontal).

.TP
.B PX_PER_SP
14 pixels per staff-space (vertical).

Line thicknesses from
.IR render (1)
are given in staff-spaces and are converted to integer pixels by the
same factor, with a minimum of 1\~px.

.SS Output Primitives

.TP
.B stroke_line \fIx0\fR \fIy0\fR \fIx1\fR \fIy1\fR \fIthickness\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Straight line from (\fIx0\fR,\fIy0\fR) to (\fIx1\fR,\fIy1\fR) with
the given pixel thickness and colour.
Used for staff lines, stems, ledger lines, barlines, and the strokes
that compose sharp and flat glyphs.

.TP
.B fill_circle \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIw\fR \fIh\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Filled ellipse whose bounding box has its top-left corner at
(\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR) with width \fIw\fR and height \fIh\fR (Nuklear
bounding-box convention).
Used for filled noteheads (1.4\~sp wide, 1.0\~sp tall), augmentation
dots, and interior white fills that hollow out half and whole noteheads.

.TP
.B stroke_circle \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIw\fR \fIh\fR \fIthickness\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Stroked ellipse, same bounding-box convention as
.BR fill_circle .
Used for the outer ring of half noteheads (1.4\~sp wide, 1.0\~sp tall)
and whole noteheads (1.7\~sp wide, 1.1\~sp tall).

.TP
.B stroke_arc \fIcx\fR \fIcy\fR \fIradius\fR \fIa_min\fR \fIa_max\fR \fIthickness\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Stroked circular arc centred at (\fIcx\fR,\fIcy\fR).
Angles are in degrees; 0 is the 3 o'clock position, increasing
counter-clockwise (Nuklear/X11 convention).
Defined in the source but not currently emitted; reserved for future use.

.TP
.B fill_arc \fIcx\fR \fIcy\fR \fIradius\fR \fIa_min\fR \fIa_max\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Filled circular arc sector, same angle convention as
.BR stroke_arc .
Used to draw the belly of flat glyphs (270\(de to 90\(de).

.TP
.B fill_triangle \fIx0\fR \fIy0\fR \fIx1\fR \fIy1\fR \fIx2\fR \fIy2\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Filled triangle with the given three vertices.
Defined in the source but not currently emitted; reserved for future use.

.TP
.B stroke_curve \fIx0\fR \fIy0\fR \fIcx0\fR \fIcy0\fR \fIcx1\fR \fIcy1\fR \fIx1\fR \fIy1\fR \fIthickness\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Cubic Bezier curve from (\fIx0\fR,\fIy0\fR) to (\fIx1\fR,\fIy1\fR)
with control points (\fIcx0\fR,\fIcy0\fR) and (\fIcx1\fR,\fIcy1\fR).
Used for ties and slurs.
The control points are placed at one-third and two-thirds of the
horizontal span, offset vertically by 0.8\~staff-spaces in the
direction indicated by the TIE command's
.I up
flag.

.TP
.B fill_rect \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIw\fR \fIh\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Filled rectangle with top-left corner at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR), width
.I w
and height
.IR h .
Used for the canvas background (white), whole rests (1.6\~sp wide,
0.5\~sp tall, hanging below the second-from-top staff line), and half
rests (same dimensions, sitting on the middle staff line).

.TP
.B draw_text \fIx\fR \fIy\fR "\fItext\fR" \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Text string at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).
Used for clef labels (the letter
.B G
for treble,
.B F
for bass), stacked time-signature digits, figured-bass numbers and
symbols, accidental names for unrecognised glyphs, and the score title.
Figured-bass text is emitted in a muted grey (120\~120\~120) rather
than black; all other text is near-black (20\~20\~20).
The downstream renderer is expected to substitute an appropriate music
font for clef labels and to honour a smaller font size for
figured-bass text.

.SS Musical Shape Rendering

.TP
Filled notehead (quarter, eighth)
One
.B fill_circle
with bounding box 20\~px wide by 14\~px tall (1.4 by 1.0 staff-spaces).

.TP
Open notehead (half note)
One
.B stroke_circle
(2\~px thick) followed by a smaller white
.B fill_circle
(60\~% by 55\~% of the head dimensions) to leave an open centre.

.TP
Whole note
One
.B stroke_circle
(2\~px thick, 1.7 by 1.1 staff-spaces) followed by a smaller white
.B fill_circle
(55\~% by 50\~%) for the interior hole.

.TP
Stem
One
.B stroke_line
(1\~px thick) between the notehead attachment point and the free tip.

.TP
Ledger line
One
.B stroke_line
extending the given half-width in each direction from the note x position.

.TP
Augmentation dot
One
.B fill_circle
of diameter 4\~px (0.15 staff-spaces, minimum 2\~px radius).

.TP
Tie / slur
One
.B stroke_curve
(1\~px thick).
The arc bulges 0.8\~staff-spaces above the note for an upward tie,
below for a downward tie.

.TP
Whole rest
One
.B fill_rect
22\~px wide by 7\~px tall, hanging below the second-from-top staff
line (1.0 staff-space from the top line).

.TP
Half rest
One
.B fill_rect
22\~px wide by 7\~px tall, sitting on the middle staff line
(2.0 staff-spaces from the top line).

.TP
Quarter rest
Three
.B stroke_line
segments forming a zigzag between staff-space offsets 1.0, 2.0,
and 3.0 from the top line.

.TP
Sharp glyph
Four
.B stroke_line
segments: two vertical strokes 1.2\~staff-spaces tall, and two
horizontal bars 0.55\~staff-spaces wide spaced 0.5\~staff-spaces apart.

.TP
Flat glyph
One
.B stroke_line
(vertical, 1.6\~staff-spaces tall), one
.B fill_arc
forming the belly (270\(de to 90\(de), and a smaller white
.B fill_arc
cutout to leave the belly open.

.TP
Key signature
Accidentals are drawn at the standard staff positions for the active
clef (treble or bass) using the sharp or flat glyph routines above.
The order of sharps is F C G D A E B; the order of flats is
B E A D G C F.
Accidentals are spaced 0.7\~staff-spaces apart horizontally.

.TP
Treble clef
.B draw_text
emitting the letter
.BR G .

.TP
Bass clef
.B draw_text
emitting the letter
.B F
followed by two small
.B fill_circle
dots to its right, placed at 0.5 and 1.5 staff-spaces below the
reference y position.

.TP
Time signature
Two
.B draw_text
calls: the numerator at 0.5 staff-spaces below the top of the staff,
and the denominator at 2.5 staff-spaces below.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I draw
does not write diagnostics to standard error.
Unrecognised input commands are passed through to standard output as
comment lines of the form:

.RS
# unknown: \fIoriginal line\fR
.RE

.SH EXIT STATUS
The program always exits with status 0.

.SH NOTES
Clef and flat position tables encode only the conventional placements
for major keys (up to seven sharps or seven flats).
Key signatures with more than seven accidentals are silently truncated
to seven.

The canvas
.B # canvas
comment line gives the total pixel dimensions of the output and must
appear before any drawing commands; the downstream renderer should use
it to allocate a pixmap or window of the correct size.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR render (1),
.IR loader (1),
.IR lilypond (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jakob Kastelic (2026).
