.TH ENTRY 1 "25 February 2026" "1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
entry.rs \- MIDI text stream to Lilypond-style chord sequencer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ./entry.rs
.B \-\-key
.I KEY
.B \-\-time
.I TIME
.B \-\-title
.I TITLE...
[
.B \-\-outdir
.I DIR
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B entry.rs
processes a MIDI-to-text stream. By default, it reads from stdin and, upon
EOF, prints a formatted Lilypond-style sequence to stdout.
.PP
If
.B \-\-outdir
is specified, the program switches to "live" mode: it echoes stdin to
stdout immediately and incrementally writes sequence files (1.txt, 2.txt...)
to the chosen directory whenever all keys are released.
.PP
Notes are grouped into chords. The lowest note is the
.B bassline,
the highest is the
.B melody
(or 'r' if solo), and middle notes populate
.B melody_n
blocks. Spelling is key-aware; in F, "ais" becomes "bes".
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-key " KEY"
Musical key for enharmonic spelling (e.g., F, C).
.TP
.BI \-\-time " TIME"
Time signature metadata string.
.TP
.BI \-\-title " TITLE"
Title metadata. Consumes following words until another flag.
.TP
.BI \-\-outdir " DIR"
Enables live mode. Echoes stdin and saves output to
.I DIR/n.txt
incrementally. Selects the first unused integer for the filename.
.TP
.BI \-\-duration " DUR"
Sets the default note duration using Lilypond notation.
Common values include:
.B 1
(whole),
.B 2
(half),
.B 4
(quarter),
.B 8
(eighth),
.B 16
(sixteenth), etc.
Appending a dot (e.g.,
.B 2.
) creates a dotted note. If omitted,
defaults to
.B 2
(half note).
.SH OUTPUT FORMATTING
The program calculates bar lines based on the
.B \-\-time
and
.B \-\-duration
arguments. For instance, with
.B \-\-time 3/2
and
.B \-\-duration 2,
the output will wrap every three notes, ensuring the text file represents
one musical measure per line within the curly braces.
.SH EXAMPLES
Convert a file and print the result:
.IP
cat raw_midi.log | ./entry.rs --key F --title "My Piece"
.PP
Live recording to a directory:
.IP
tail -f midi.log | ./entry.rs --key F --outdir seq --title "Session 1"
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jakob Kastelic (2026).
