.TH G2LY 1
.SH NAME
g2ly \- convert group output into a four-staff LilyPond score

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B g2ly

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I g2ly
reads processed lesson data (the output of the group utility) from standard input and generates a complete LilyPond (.ly) document on standard output.
.PP
The resulting score is organized into four distinct staves, providing a full realization of the continuo exercise, including melody, realized accompaniment, and figured bass.

.SH INPUT FORMAT
The program expects a stream of lines beginning with either a 
.B LESSON
header or a
.B GROUP
entry.

.SS LESSON Header
The header provides metadata for the score:
.IP
LESSON \fIkey\fR \fItime\fR \fItitle...\fR
.PP
The \fIkey\fR and \fItime\fR are applied to all staves, while the \fItitle\fR is placed in the LilyPond header block.

.SS GROUP Entries
Each group represents a discrete musical event associated with a bass note. Fields are labeled and space-separated:
.TP
.B ID:
Numerical identifier for the group.
.TP
.B passing
Optional flag indicating the group is a passing motion.
.TP
.B BASS:
The written bass note and duration (e.g., g2).
.TP
.B FIGURES:
The figured bass symbols (e.g., #6, 2/#4/6).
.TP
.B MELODY:
Melody tokens or a hyphen "-" for spacer rests.
.TP
.B BASS_ACTUAL:
The literal pitch played by the bass voice.
.TP
.B REALIZATION:
Slash-separated pitches for the realization (e.g., b'/g'/d').

.SH STAFF ORGANIZATION
The output score consists of four staves, ordered top to bottom:

.IP 1. 4
.B Melody:
Treble clef. Contains the verbatim tokens from the \fBMELODY\fR field.
.IP 2. 4
.B Realization (Treble):
Treble clef. Contains realization pitches at or above middle C (MIDI note 60 or higher).
.IP 3. 4
.B Realization (Bass):
Bass clef. This staff contains two voices. Voice 1 is the 
.B BASS_ACTUAL
pitch. Voice 2 contains realization pitches below middle C (MIDI notes lower than 60).
.IP 4. 4
.B Bass:
Bass clef. Displays the 
.B BASS
(written/expected) note with a \fBFiguredBass\fR context rendered below it.

.SH FIGURED BASS
The 
.B FIGURES
field is translated into LilyPond \fI\figuremode\fR syntax:
.TP
\(bu
"0" becomes <_> (an empty figure).
.TP
\(bu
"#" or "b" becomes <_+> or <_-> (accidental-only third).
.TP
\(bu
Prefixes like "#6" or "b6" become <6+> or <6->.
.TP
\(bu
Passing groups (marked with the \fBpassing\fR flag) ignore the figures field and emit a solidus <_\\> to mark the motion.

.SH TIES
Realization notes are tied across passing groups to ensure harmonic continuity. If group \fIN+1\fR is marked as passing, any pitch appearing in the realization of both group \fIN\fR and group \fIN+1\fR will receive a tie ("~") in the LilyPond output.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The program writes a warning to standard error if it encounters a 
.B GROUP
line that cannot be parsed, but it will attempt to continue processing the remaining input.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jakob Kastelic (2026).

.SH SEE ALSO
load(1), lilypond(1)
