.TH GROUP 1
.SH NAME
group \- align MIDI notes to lesson bassline, figures, and melody

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B group

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I group
receives MIDI note-on/off events and lesson data from a load via standard input.
It groups each lesson entry — bass note, figures, and melody — together with the
corresponding MIDI performance data. A group is considered complete when all
currently held notes have been released.

Some bass notes are marked "passing", meaning the harmony from the previous
bass note is still active. Passing groups inherit the previous group's realization
(chord), and the group emits the previous group immediately when a passing bass
note is detected.

MIDI uses 12 pitch classes per octave, collapsing enharmonic equivalents. The
group uses the lesson's key signature to spell MIDI note numbers correctly
(e.g., F# vs Gb) when formatting output.

A
.B LESSON
command resets all internal state in preparation for a new sequence of
.B BASSNOTE,
.B FIGURES,
and
.B MELODY
commands, followed by
.B NOTE_ON
and
.B NOTE_OFF
pairs.

.SH INPUT FORMAT
The program expects lines on standard input of the following types:

.TP
.B LESSON <num> <key> <time_sig> <title...>
Reset internal state and prepare for a new lesson sequence.

.TP
.B BASSNOTE <id>: <note> [passing]
Define a bass note for group <id>. If "passing" is specified, the group inherits
the previous chord.

.TP
.B FIGURES <id>: <figures>
Define the figured bass symbols for group <id>.

.TP
.B MELODY <id>: <melody>
Define the melody notes for group <id>.

.TP
.B NOTE_ON <note> VELOCITY:<v> TIME:<t>
Register a MIDI note-on event at the given timestamp.

.TP
.B NOTE_OFF <note> TIME:<t>
Register a MIDI note-off event at the given timestamp.

.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Output lines are written to standard output in the following format:

.PP
    GROUP ID:<id> [passing] BASS:<expected> FIGURES:<fig> MELODY:<mel> BASS_ACTUAL:<note> TIME:<t> REALIZATION:<chord>

.TP
.B passing
If the group is marked as passing, the word "passing" appears immediately after
the ID field.

.TP
.B REALIZATION
Lists upper voices only (bass excluded), highest to lowest, slash-separated.
Passing groups inherit the previous group's realization.

.SH EXAMPLE INPUT
.nf
LESSON 1 G 3/2 Purcell bars 48-52
BASSNOTE 0: g2
FIGURES 0: 0
MELODY 0: g'2.
BASSNOTE 1: fis2 passing
FIGURES 1: 0
MELODY 1: b'4
BASSNOTE 2: e2
FIGURES 2: #6
MELODY 2: b'4 cis''4
NOTE_ON g, VELOCITY:79 TIME:6059
NOTE_ON d' VELOCITY:79 TIME:21858
NOTE_ON b VELOCITY:83 TIME:21858
NOTE_OFF g, TIME:22858
NOTE_OFF b TIME:22860
NOTE_OFF d' TIME:22861
.fi

.SH EXAMPLE OUTPUT
.PP
GROUP ID:0 BASS:g2 FIGURES:0 MELODY:g'2. BASS_ACTUAL:g, TIME:6059 REALIZATION:d'/b

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Error messages are written to standard error for:

.TP
\(bu
Malformed input lines.

.TP
\(bu
Invalid MIDI events.

.TP
\(bu
Missing or out-of-range lesson entries.

.TP
\(bu
Other unexpected conditions during group assembly.

.SH EXIT STATUS
The program exits silently on success.
On error, a diagnostic is written to standard error and the program terminates
without producing normal output.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jakob Kastelic (2026).

.SH SEE ALSO
load(1), lilypond(1)
