.TH LOAD 1
.SH NAME
load \- load and normalize continuo lesson data for pipeline processing

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B load

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I load
reads a lesson request from standard input, loads the corresponding
lesson file from disk, and writes a normalized, fully expanded
representation to standard output.

.SH INPUT FORMAT
The program expects a line on standard input of the form:

    LOAD_LESSON \fIn\fR

where \fIn\fR is a non-negative decimal integer identifying the lesson
number.

If the input does not begin with the literal token
.B LOAD_LESSON
followed by a valid integer, an error message is written to standard
error and the program exits without producing output.

.SH FILES
For lesson number \fIn\fR, the program reads:

    seq/\fIn\fR.txt

The file must be readable.  Failure to open the file results in an
error message to standard error and termination.

.SH LESSON FILE FORMAT
Lesson files are plain text and contain metadata and three musical
sections.

Recognized metadata fields:

.TP
.B title:
Lesson title (free text).
.TP
.B key:
Key signature (free text).
.TP
.B time:
Time signature (free text).

Section headers:

.TP
.B bassline
Begins the bass section.
.TP
.B figures
Begins the figured bass section.
.TP
.B melody
Begins the melody section.

Each section continues until a line beginning with `}` or another
section header.

Within sections, tokens are separated by whitespace.  Tokens are
preserved verbatim except as described below.

.SH PASSING NOTES
A bass token may be marked as a passing note by appending a trailing
`p` to its duration, for example:

    fis2p
    g4.p

Passing notes consume rhythmic time but are marked specially in output.
The trailing `p` is removed before printing.

.SH DURATION HANDLING
Durations follow LilyPond-style numeric notation:

.TP
1
whole note
.TP
2
half note
.TP
4
quarter note
.TP
8
eighth note
.TP
16
sixteenth note

Dotted durations are supported using one or more trailing dots.
Each dot adds half the previous value.

If a note token omits a duration number, it inherits the most recently
specified duration in its voice.

.SH MELODY GROUPING
Melody tokens are grouped so that each bass note is associated with
all melody tokens sounding during its rhythmic span.

If a bass note is covered entirely by a sustained melody note begun
earlier, its melody group is empty.

.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Output is written to standard output.

The first line is:

    LESSON \fIn\fR \fIkey\fR \fItime\fR \fItitle\fR

For each bass index \fIi\fR (starting at 0), the following lines are
printed:

    BASSNOTE \fIi\fR: \fItoken\fR
.br
    FIGURES \fIi\fR: \fItoken\fR
.br
    MELODY \fIi\fR: \fItokens\fR

If the bass note is marked as passing, the BASSNOTE line becomes:

    BASSNOTE \fIi\fR: \fItoken\fR passing

If no melody begins during the span of a bass note, the melody line is:

    MELODY \fIi\fR: -

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Error messages are written to standard error for:

.TP
\(bu
Malformed input command.
.TP
\(bu
Invalid lesson number.
.TP
\(bu
Unreadable lesson file.
.TP
\(bu
Length mismatch between bass and figures sections.

.SH EXIT STATUS
The program exits silently on success.
On error, a diagnostic is written to standard error and the program
terminates without producing normal output.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jakob Kastelic (2026).

.SH SEE ALSO
lilypond(1)
