.TH RENDER 1
.SH NAME
render \- parse a LilyPond score and emit a stream of drawing primitives

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B render

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I render
reads a LilyPond source file from standard input, parses the subset
of LilyPond syntax produced by
.IR g2ly ,
and writes a sequence of drawing primitive commands to standard output.
The output describes all graphical elements of the score \(em staff lines,
noteheads, stems, rests, barlines, clefs, key signatures, time signatures,
figured-bass symbols, and ties \(em in abstract coordinate units independent
of any output device.  A downstream program is responsible for mapping these
units to pixels or another physical medium.

.SH INPUT FORMAT
.I render
reads LilyPond source from standard input.  Only the subset of LilyPond
that
.I g2ly
emits is recognised; other constructs are silently skipped.

Recognised top-level constructs:

.TP
.B \eversion "\fIstring\fR"
Consumed and ignored.
.TP
.B \eheader { title = "\fItext\fR" }
Sets the piece title.  All other header fields are ignored.
.TP
.B \elayout { ... }
Consumed and ignored.
.TP
.B \escore { << \fIstaves\fR >> }
The main musical content.  Contains one or more
.B \enew Staff
blocks.

.SH LILYPOND SUBSET
Within a Staff block the following directives are recognised:

.TP
.B \eclef treble\fR|\fBbass
Sets the clef for the staff.
.TP
.B \ekey \fIpitch\fB \emajor
Sets the key signature.  Only major keys are supported.
.TP
.B \etime \fIn\fB/\fId
Sets the time signature.

Music is contained in
.B \enew Voice
sub-blocks or written directly at staff level for single-voice staves.
Figured bass is contained in a
.B \enew FiguredBass
block enclosing a
.B \efiguremode
block.

.SH MUSIC TOKENS
Inside a Voice or Staff, the following music tokens are recognised:

.TP
.I pitch\fR[\fIoctave\fR][\fIduration\fR][\fB.\fR][\fB~\fR]
A single note.
.I pitch
is one of
.B c d e f g a b
with an optional
.B is
(sharp) or
.B es
/
.B as
(flat) suffix.
.I octave
is zero or more apostrophes
.RB ( ' )
to raise or commas
.RB ( , )
to lower from the LilyPond default octave.
.I duration
is
.BR 1 ,
.BR 2 ,
.BR 4 ,
or
.B 8
for whole, half, quarter, or eighth.
A trailing
.B .
produces a dotted duration.
A trailing
.B ~
ties the note to the next note of the same pitch.
If the duration is omitted, the most recently specified duration is inherited.
.TP
.B r\fIduration\fR[\fB.\fR]
A rest.
.TP
.B s\fIduration\fR[\fB.\fR]
A spacer rest (produces no visible symbol).
.TP
.B < \fIpitch\fR... \fB>\fIduration\fR[\fB.\fR][\fB~\fR]
A chord; one or more pitches enclosed in angle brackets share a single duration.
.TP
.B |
An explicit barline.  Barlines are also inserted implicitly at measure
boundaries if none are present in the source.

.SH FIGURE TOKENS
Inside a
.B \efiguremode
block, figured-bass groups are written as:

.RS
.B < \fIsymbols\fR > \fIduration\fR[\fB.\fR]
.RE

Each
.I symbol
within the angle brackets is one of:

.TP
.B _
A blank slot (no figure printed).
.TP
.B \e\e
A passing-note solidus.
.TP
.I N
A plain interval digit (2 through 7).
.TP
.IB N +
The interval
.I N
raised (sharp).
.TP
.IB N -
The interval
.I N
lowered (flat).

Multiple symbols within one group are stacked vertically in the output,
lowest interval first.

.SH STAVES
.I g2ly
produces four staves in top-to-bottom order.
.I render
assigns them the following roles:

.TP
.B melody
Treble clef, single voice.
.TP
.B real-treble
Treble clef, single voice (high realization).
.TP
.B real-bass
Bass clef, two voices: bass actual (voice 1) and low realization (voice 2).
.TP
.B bass
Bass clef, single voice with an attached FiguredBass staff.

.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Output is written to standard output, one command per line.
All coordinates are floating-point.
Horizontal positions are in
.I slots
and vertical positions are in
.IR staff-spaces .

.SS Coordinate System
The origin (0,\~0) is the top-left corner of the topmost staff's top line.
X increases rightward in slots; Y increases downward in staff-spaces.
All Y values are relative to the top of the whole system.

.SS Units

.TP
.B staff-space
The distance between two adjacent staff lines.  A five-line staff spans
4 staff-spaces.
.TP
.B slot
One beat of the time-signature denominator.  A quarter note in 4/4 occupies
1 slot; a dotted half note occupies 1.5 slots.

.SS Header Line
The first output line is always:

.RS
SCORE staves=\fIn\fR slots=\fIf\fR timesig=\fInum\fR/\fIden\fR title="\fItext\fR"
.RE

Fields:

.TP
.B staves
Number of staves in the system.
.TP
.B slots
Total score length in slots.
.TP
.B timesig
Time signature of the first staff.
.TP
.B title
Piece title; spaces replaced by underscores.

The header is immediately followed by:

.RS
EXTENT \fItotal_x\fR \fItotal_y\fR
.RE

giving the bounding width and height of the entire system.

.SS Primitive Commands

.TP
LINE \fIx1\fR \fIy1\fR \fIx2\fR \fIy2\fR \fIt\fR
Straight line from (\fIx1\fR,\fIy1\fR) to (\fIx2\fR,\fIy2\fR) with thickness
.I t
in staff-spaces.  Used for staff lines, stems, ledger lines, and barlines.

.TP
NOTEHEAD \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIfilled\fR \fIsp\fR
Notehead ellipse centred at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).
.I filled
is 1 for quarter and shorter notes, 0 for half notes.
.I sp
is the staff position in half-spaces above the bottom line of the staff
(0\~=\~bottom line, 8\~=\~top line); used by the renderer to determine
stem direction and ledger-line count.

.TP
WHOLE \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIsp\fR
Whole-note head (open oval, wider than a half-note head) centred at
(\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).

.TP
STEM \fIx\fR \fIy_base\fR \fIy_tip\fR
Vertical stem at horizontal position
.IR x ,
from
.I y_base
(the notehead end) to
.I y_tip
(the free end).  Standard thickness is 0.1 staff-space.

.TP
LEDGER \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIhalf_width\fR
Ledger line centred at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR) extending \fIhalf_width\fR slots
in each direction.

.TP
DOT \fIx\fR \fIy\fR
Augmentation dot; small filled circle at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).

.TP
TIE \fIx1\fR \fIy\fR \fIx2\fR \fIup\fR
Tie arc from \fIx1\fR to \fIx2\fR at staff-space height \fIy\fR.
.I up
is 1 if the arc curves upward, 0 if it curves downward.

.TP
REST \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIdur\fR
Rest symbol at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).
.I dur
is 1 (whole), 2 (half), or 4 (quarter).

.TP
BARLINE \fIx\fR \fIy_top\fR \fIy_bot\fR
Vertical barline at horizontal position
.IR x ,
spanning from
.I y_top
to
.IR y_bot .
Full-height barlines span all staves.

.TP
CLEF \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIkind\fR
Clef glyph whose top-left reference point is (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR).
.I kind
is
.B treble
or
.BR bass .

.TP
TIMESIG \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fInum\fR \fIden\fR
Time-signature numerals stacked at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR) (top of staff).

.TP
KEYSIG \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIsharps\fR
Key signature at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR) (top of staff).
.I sharps
is positive for sharps, negative for flats.  The renderer draws
accidentals at the standard staff positions for the given clef.

.TP
FIGURE \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fItext\fR
Figured-bass symbol at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR), below the bottom line of the
bass staff.
.I text
is one of: a plain digit (2\(en7), a digit followed by
.B +
(raised) or
.B \-
(lowered), the literal
.B _
for a blank, or
.B /
for a passing-note solidus.
Multiple symbols at the same rhythmic position are emitted as separate
FIGURE commands at successive vertical positions.

.TP
GLYPH \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIscale\fR \fIname\fR
Accidental glyph at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR) scaled by
.IR scale .
.I name
is
.B sharp
or
.BR flat .

.TP
TITLE \fIx\fR \fIy\fR "\fItext\fR"
Title string centred at (\fIx\fR,\fIy\fR), above the top staff.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Warnings are written to standard error for:

.TP
\(bu
An unexpected token where a specific token was required (for example,
a missing brace).

Non-fatal parse errors do not halt execution; the affected construct is
skipped and parsing continues.  No error is produced for unknown or
unsupported LilyPond constructs, which are silently consumed.

.SH EXIT STATUS
The program always exits with status 0.  Diagnostic warnings, if any,
are written to standard error.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jakob Kastelic (2026).

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR loader (1),
.IR lilypond (1),
.IR g2ly (1)
