.TH RULES 1
.SH NAME
rules - evaluate harmonic correctness of realized continuo chords

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rules

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I rules
is a filter that reads a stream of realized musical groups from standard input and evaluates them against a set of voice-leading and harmonic rules. It uses a sliding window of size 4 to check transitions between consecutive chords.

For each input group, the program outputs a result line indicating whether the group passes (OK) or fails (FAIL) the validation suite.

.SH INPUT FORMAT
The program expects "group" lines, typically produced by a realization engine. A group line must start with the token
.B GROUP
and contain the following space-separated fields:

.TP
.B ID:\fIn\fR
The decimal integer identifier for the group.
.TP
.B passing
(Optional) If present, marks the group as a passing chord.
.TP
.B BASS:\fIpitch\fR
The LilyPond-style pitch of the bass note (e.g., \fIg2\fR).
.TP
.B FIGURES:\fIfig\fR
The figured bass symbols associated with the note.
.TP
.B MELODY:\fIpitch\fR
One or more LilyPond-style pitches representing the melody notes.
.TP
.B BASS_ACTUAL:\fIpitch\fR
The simplified pitch name used for interval calculations.
.TP
.B TIME:\fIn\fR
The rhythmic timestamp of the group.
.TP
.B REALIZATION:\fIp1/p2/...\fR
Slash-separated LilyPond pitches representing the inner voices.

Lines starting with
.B LESSON
,
.B //
, or empty lines are echoed to standard output unchanged.

.SH VALIDATION RULES
The following rules are applied to each non-passing group:

.IP \(bu 4
.B Parallel Fifths and Octaves:
Checks for parallel motion into perfect fifths or perfect octaves between any two voices (including bass and realization) across consecutive non-passing groups.
.IP \(bu 4
.B Melody Leap Limit:
The interval between the last note of the previous melody and the first note of the current melody must not exceed a major sixth (9 semitones).
.IP \(bu 4
.B Bass Tritone:
The bass may not move by a diminished fifth or augmented fourth (6 semitones mod 12).
.IP \(bu 4
.B Empty Realization:
Every non-passing group must contain at least one inner voice in the realization field.
.IP \(bu 4
.B Melody Presence:
Every non-passing group must have at least one melody note.

.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
For every processed group, the program prints a single line to standard output:

.B RESULT \fIID\fR OK
.br
if all rules pass.

.B RESULT \fIID\fR FAIL \fImessage\fR
.br
if a rule is violated, where \fImessage\fR describes the specific error (e.g., "Parallel fifths between voice 0 (c->d) and voice 1 (g'->a')").

.SH EXIT STATUS
The program returns 0 on successful processing of the input stream. It may print errors to standard error if the input cannot be read.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jakob Kastelic (2026).
