.TH SHOW 1
.SH NAME
show \- display a score primitive stream in an X11 window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B show
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B show
reads the ASCII drawing-primitive stream produced by
.IR draw (1)
from standard input, parses all commands into an in-memory list,
then opens an X11 window and renders the score as a static bitmap.
.PP
All input is consumed before the window is opened, so the window is
created at exactly the right size on the first frame.
The score is rendered once into an off-screen pixmap; subsequent
expose events and window resizes blit from that pixmap without
re-executing any drawing commands.
.SH USAGE
.PP
Typical pipeline:
.RS
.EX
render < score.ly | draw | show
.EE
.RE
.PP
Build:
.RS
.EX
cc -std=c99 -O2 -o bin/show src/show.c -lX11
.EE
.RE
.SH INPUT FORMAT
.B show
reads the output of
.IR draw (1),
one command per line.
Lines beginning with
.B #
are treated as comments and ignored, with one exception: a line of the
form
.PP
.RS
.B # canvas
.I W H
.RE
.PP
sets the score canvas size to
.I W
by
.I H
pixels.
This line must appear before any drawing commands; it is emitted
automatically by
.IR draw (1)
as the second output line.
.PP
Empty lines are ignored.
Unrecognised keywords are silently skipped.
.SS Drawing commands
All coordinates and sizes are integer pixels.
Colours are three decimal integers
.IR r ,
.IR g ,
.IR b
in the range 0\(en255.
.TP
.B stroke_line \fIx0\fR \fIy0\fR \fIx1\fR \fIy1\fR \fIthickness\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Draw a solid line from
.RI ( x0 , y0 )
to
.RI ( x1 , y1 )
with the given pixel thickness.
Line ends use round caps; joins use round joins.
.TP
.B fill_circle \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIw\fR \fIh\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Fill an ellipse whose bounding box has its top-left corner at
.RI ( x , y )
with width
.I w
and height
.IR h .
.TP
.B stroke_circle \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIw\fR \fIh\fR \fIthickness\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Stroke the outline of an ellipse with the same bounding-box convention
as
.BR fill_circle .
.TP
.B stroke_arc \fIcx\fR \fIcy\fR \fIradius\fR \fIa_min\fR \fIa_max\fR \fIthickness\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Stroke a circular arc centred at
.RI ( cx , cy )
with the given radius.
.I a_min
and
.I a_max
are in whole degrees; 0 is the 3\~o'clock position and angles increase
counter-clockwise, matching the X11 convention.
The arc runs from
.I a_min
to
.I a_max
(extent =
.IR a_max \- a_min ).
.TP
.B fill_arc \fIcx\fR \fIcy\fR \fIradius\fR \fIa_min\fR \fIa_max\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Fill a circular arc sector with the same parameters as
.BR stroke_arc .
.TP
.B fill_triangle \fIx0\fR \fIy0\fR \fIx1\fR \fIy1\fR \fIx2\fR \fIy2\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Fill a triangle with the three given vertices.
.TP
.B stroke_curve \fIx0\fR \fIy0\fR \fIcx0\fR \fIcy0\fR \fIcx1\fR \fIcy1\fR \fIx1\fR \fIy1\fR \fIthickness\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Stroke a cubic Bezier curve from
.RI ( x0 , y0 )
to
.RI ( x1 , y1 )
with control points
.RI ( cx0 , cy0 )
and
.RI ( cx1 , cy1 ).
The curve is tessellated into 24 line segments using the standard
de\~Casteljau weights, matching the algorithm in
.IR nuklear_xlib (3).
Line ends use round caps.
.TP
.B fill_rect \fIx\fR \fIy\fR \fIw\fR \fIh\fR \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Fill the rectangle with top-left corner at
.RI ( x , y ),
width
.I w
and height
.IR h .
.TP
.B draw_text \fIx\fR \fIy\fR "\fItext\fR" \fIr\fR \fIg\fR \fIb\fR
Draw the string
.I text
at
.RI ( x , y ).
The string must be enclosed in double quotes; it may contain spaces.
.B show
shifts the y coordinate down by 12 pixels to convert from the
top-of-glyph origin used by
.IR draw (1)
to the baseline origin required by
.IR XDrawString (3).
If the red component
.I r
is greater than 80 (indicating the grey colour used for figured-bass
notation), the smaller font is used instead of the normal font.
.SH WINDOW BEHAVIOUR
The window opens at the score's natural pixel size as given by the
.B # canvas
line.
If no such line is present the window defaults to 800\(mu600 pixels.
.PP
The window title is set to
.BR Score .
.PP
The window can be freely resized.
When the window is larger than the score, the score is centred and the
surrounding area is filled with white.
When the window is smaller than the score, the top-left portion of the
score is shown and the rest is clipped.
No scaling is applied; the score is always rendered at 1:1 pixel
resolution.
.PP
The following keys close the window:
.RS
.TP
.B q
.TQ
.B Q
.TQ
.B Escape
Quit immediately.
.RE
.PP
Clicking the window manager's close button also exits cleanly.
.SH FONTS
Two X11 core fonts are used:
.TP
.B FONT_NAME
.B -\(*-fixed-medium-r-\(*-\(*-14-\(*-\(*-\(*-\(*-\(*-iso8859-\(*
Used for all text except figured-bass numbers.
.TP
.B FONT_SMALL
.B -\(*-fixed-medium-r-\(*-\(*-11-\(*-\(*-\(*-\(*-\(*-iso8859-\(*
Used when the draw colour is grey (r > 80), signalling figured-bass text.
.PP
If the preferred 14-pixel XLFD pattern is not available,
.B show
falls back to the X11 guaranteed font
.BR fixed .
If
.B FONT_SMALL
is not available, the normal font is used for figured-bass text as well.
.PP
These are core X11 bitmap fonts loaded with
.IR XLoadQueryFont (3).
To use an outline or system font, the font name constants in the source
must be changed and
.IR XftDrawStringUtf8 (3)
substituted for
.IR XDrawString (3).
.SH IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.SS Double buffering
The score is drawn once into an off-screen
.IR Pixmap (3)
immediately after the GC is created.
On every
.B Expose
event (and after every
.B ConfigureNotify
resize event)
.IR XCopyArea (3)
blits from this pixmap to the window.
Because the pixmap is fixed, repaints are instant and flicker-free.
.SS Colour allocation
Colours are allocated with
.IR XAllocColor (3)
on the default colormap.
This works correctly on both 8-bit pseudocolor and 24-bit truecolor
displays, unlike a direct pixel pack which only works on truecolor.
.SS Arc angles
X11 arc functions take angles in 64ths of a degree.
.B show
multiplies the integer degree values from
.IR draw (1)
by 64 before passing them to
.IR XDrawArc (3)
and
.IR XFillArc (3).
The extent is computed as
.RI ( a_max \- a_min )\(mu64.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B show: cannot open display
.IR XOpenDisplay (3)
returned NULL.
The
.B DISPLAY
environment variable is not set or the X server is not reachable.
.TP
.B show: cannot load font
Neither the preferred XLFD pattern nor the fallback
.B fixed
font could be loaded.
.TP
.B show: too many commands (max 65536)
The input stream contained more than 65536 drawing commands.
The constant
.B MAX_CMDS
in the source must be increased.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B show
exits with status 0 in all normal cases, including keyboard or
window-manager quit.
It calls
.IR exit (3)
with status 1 if
.I strdup
fails during input parsing.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR draw (1),
.IR render (1),
.IR load (1),
.IR XDrawLine (3),
.IR XFillArc (3),
.IR XDrawString (3),
.IR XCopyArea (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jakob Kastelic (2026).
